h1. <a>Play-GWT2 Module</a>

p.  Play GWT2 provides some classes and commands to simplify the integration of a GWT 2.x Module in a play application. 
 
h2. <a>Installation</a>

p. 1. This module does not includes GWT SDK. You will need to download it. ( version 2.0.x )

p. 2. Create a new Play! application or use an existing one. 

p. 2. Set GWT_PATH (or GWT_HOME) environment variable.

p. 3. Install GWT2 module. > play install gwt2

p. 4. Edit the conf/application.conf file to enable the GWT2 module :

bc. # Additional modules
# ~~~~~
# A module is another play! application. Add a line for each module you want
# to add to your application. Modules path are either absolutes or relative to
# the application root.
#
module.gwt2=${play.path}/modules/gwt2-1.3

 
h2. <a>Initialize you Application</a> 
 
bc. play gwt2:init myApp

p. this will
 - create a folder in your application : <application_path>/app/gwt (directory for gwt modules)
 - create a folder in your application : <application_path>/gwt-public (directory for GWT compiled resources)
 - and copy gwt-user.jar to <application_path>/lib

if you want to change get path for you gwt modules, edit the conf/application.conf file and add theese lines

bc. # GWT2 Configuration
# ~~~~~
# gwt2.modulespath=myfolder

then you can set you personal folder to use


h2. <a>Create a GWT Module</a> 
 
create your module like this:

bc. play gwt2:create myApp

p. this will ask you a gwt module name 

bc. What is the gwt module name ?

p. enter for eg: firstmodule

p. this action create some files
	<application_path>/app/gwt/firstmodule
	<application_path>/app/gwt/firstmodule/Firstmodule.gwt.xml (module)
	<application_path>/app/gwt/firstmodule/public
	<application_path>/app/gwt/firstmodule/public/index.html (default page for entry point)
	<application_path>/app/gwt/firstmodule/client
	<application_path>/app/gwt/firstmodule/client/Firstmodule.java (entry point)
	<application_path>/app/gwt/firstmodule/client/GreetingService.java
	<application_path>/app/gwt/firstmodule/client/GreetingServiceAsync.java
	<application_path>/app/gwt/firstmodule/shared
	<application_path>/app/gwt/firstmodule/shared/FieldVerifier.java
	<application_path>/app/gwt/firstmodule/server
	<application_path>/app/gwt/firstmodule/server/GreetingServiceImpl.java

p. GreetingService Interface must use annotation @RemoteServiceRelativePath("greet")

p. GreetingServiceImpl.java must implements GWTService and us @GWT2ServicePath("/firstmodule/greet") annotation


h2. <a>Testing you GWT Module with dev mode</a>

First start you Play application.

bc. play run myApp

Then start the dev mode, 

bc. play gwt2:devmode myApp

p.  GWT will compile your modules at first time.

p. Now you access your gwt module this url <host>/app/firstmodule/index.html 

h2. <a>Compiling a module</a>

To compile a module (eg: before deployment)

bc. play gwt2:compile myApp

p. this will ask you a gwt module name 

bc. What is the gwt module name ? 

p.  Enter a name, then GWT will compile your module.


h2. <a>Remove a GWT Module</a>

p. As for creating a new GWT Module but use gwt2:remove 

bc. play gwt2:remove myApp

p. this will ask you a gwt module name 

bc. What is the gwt module name ?

p. all directory of your module will be deleted:
- 	<application_path>/app/gwt/firstmodule/**
- 	<application_path>/gwt-public/firstmodule/**


h2. <a>Debugging the GWT UI</a>

p. 1. The easiest way it to eclipsify, netbeansify, ... you application and then use you prefered IDE to use JPDA. By default GWT listen on port 3408.


h2. <a>Creating a service using GWT-RPC</a>

**this part is the same as the Play-GWT by Rustem Suniev**.

If you follow the GWT manual, it will explain you how to expose a service with GWT-RPC using a **RemoteServiceServlet**. 

Exposing a GWT service with Play is almost the same, but since you can't define servlets in a Play application, you have to use the provided support class, **play.modules.gwt.GWTService** 

For example, to implement this service:

bc. 
package gwt.mymod.client;
import com.google.gwt.user.client.rpc.RemoteService;
import com.google.gwt.user.client.rpc.RemoteServiceRelativePath;
@RemoteServiceRelativePath("hello")
public interface HelloService extends RemoteService {
    String sayHello(String name);
}


simply create a class that extends the **play.modules.gwt.GWTService**, and define the service URL path with the **play.modules.gwt.GWTServicePath** annotation. Like this:

bc.  
package services;
import play.modules.gwt2.GWT2Service;
import play.modules.gwt2.GWT2ServicePath;
import gwt.mymod.client.HelloService;
@GWT2ServicePath("/main/hello")
public class HelloServiceImpl extends GWT2Service implements HelloService {
    public String sayHello(String name) {
        return "Hello " + name;
    }
}

This is the only difference from the GWT documentation.

h2. <a>Using Play Model</a>
You can use Play Model directly with your GWT Services. For that you have 2 solutions.

p. 1. the first one is to create JPA Entity without extending play.db.jpa.Model

bc. @Entity
public class MyModel 
{
	@Required
	@MinSize(1)
	@MaxSize(100)
	@Column(name="text", nullable=false, length=100)
	public String someText;
}

You will have to use JPA.em().

p. 2. the second one is to extends your model with play.db.jpa.Model and add a Custom Field Serializer side to the model class.

bc. MyModel.java
@Entity
public class MyModel extends Model 
{
	@Required
	@MinSize(1)
	@MaxSize(100)
	@Column(name="text", nullable=false, length=100)
	public String someText;
}

bc. MyModel_CustomFieldSerializer.java
public class MyModel_CustomFieldSerializer {
	public static MyModel instantiate(SerializationStreamReader reader)
		throws SerializationException {
		return new MyModel();
	}
	public static void serialize(SerializationStreamWriter writer,
			MyModel instance)
		throws SerializationException {
		writer.writeObject(instance.id);
		writer.writeString(instance.someText);
	}
	public static void deserialize(SerializationStreamReader reader,
			MyModel instance)
		throws SerializationException {
		instance.id = (Long) reader.readObject();
		instance.someText = reader.readString();
	}

h2. <a>Samples</a>

You will find 2 samples in the folder "samples" in the play gwt2 modules.

1. simple test 
This sample is just a basic gwt module create with:
 - gwt2:init
 - gwt2:create
 - gwt2:compile

2. myModel
This sample is an basic gwt module wich use Play Model.


h2. <a>About</a>

This Module is maintained by **Vincent Buzzano** and was originaly based on the GWT Plugin by **Rustem Suniev**.

website:
 - http://github.com/vbuzzano/play-gwt2