h1. play-mustache

This module allows you to define logic-less template snippets that can be used server-side in your "Play":http://playframework.org views as well as client-side in your JavaScript. 

The template snippets use "Mustache":http://mustache.github.com, which is a logic-less template language. For a complete reference of the language see the "official manual":http://mustache.github.com/mustache.5.html.

h2. Installation

h3. Install the module

Install the Mustache module from the modules repository:

bc. play install mustache

h3. Enable the module

After installing the module, add the following to your **application.conf**:

bc. # The Mustache module
module.mustache=${play.path}/modules/mustache

h2. Usage

h3. Meta and Script Tags

The first step is to put the **mustache.meta** tag somewhere in your document. This tag outputs an HTML meta tag containing the snippets you have defined for the current request.

After your meta tag you should include **play-mustache.min.js**, which is in the play-mustache **lib** directory. The file contains a JavaScript Mustache compiler and a mechanism to parse the templates out of the play-mustache meta tag. Copy this file to your public directory or to your CDN and include it in your document (it's important that this file comes after the meta tag). 

bc. <html>
	<head>
		<title>#{get 'title' /}</title>
		<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8">
		<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="screen" href="@{'/public/stylesheets/main.css'}">
		<link rel="shortcut icon" type="image/png" href="@{'/public/images/favicon.png'}">
		#{mustache.meta /}
	    	<script type="text/javascript" src="@{'/public/javascripts/play-mustache.min.js'}"></script>
	</head>
	<body>
	    #{doLayout /}
	</body>
</html> 

h3. Inline Template Snippets

You can define Mustache templates inline in your views using the **mustache.template** tag:

bc. #{mustache.template 'task_item'}
	<li class="task" id="task_{{id}}">
		<span class="name">Task {{id}}</span>
		<span class="details">{{details}}</span>
		<span class="priority">{{priority}}</span>
	</li>
#{/mustache.template}



The template can then be used within your view using the **mustache.print** tag:

bc. <ul id="tasks">
#{list tasks, as: 'task'}
	#{mustache.print 'task_item', context:task /}
#{/list}
</ul>


And you can use the template within your JavaScript using the **PlayMustache.to_html** method:

bc. var data = {
	id: '34',
	details: 'Finish the project',
	priority: 'High'
}
var html = PlayMustache.to_html("task_item", data);
$('#tasks').append($(html));


h3. External Template Snippets

If you don't want to specify your snippet inline, you can move it into an external file. By default the module will look in **app/views/mustaches** for template files, but you can configure this path by specifying **mustache.dir** in your **application.conf**.

To reference an external snippet, just use the relative filename as the template name. For example, if your file is called **app/views/mustaches/my_template.html** then you would use it server-side like this:

bc. #{mustache.print 'my_template.html', context:data /}

And client-side like this:

bc. PlayMustache.to_html('my_template.html', data);
	
