h1. JPAGEN module

This module allows you to import a database tables to POJO instances. 

h2. <a>Enable the JPAGEN module for the application</a>

In the **conf/application.conf** file, enable the JPAGEN module by adding this line:

bc. # The jpagen module
module.jpagen=${play.path}/modules/jpagen

or in the **conf/dependencies.yaml** file:
require:
	play -> jpagen 1.0

h2. <a>Creating the conf/table_list.conf file from the database</a>

bc. play jpagen:create-list myapplication

h2. <a>Creating your domain model from the database</a>

bc. play jpagen:generate myapplication

This command will create the classes in the models package based on the database tables. This is useful is you have an existing database and you want to re-use this database.

h2. List of properties you can override in **conf/application.conf**


* @db.driver@ (required)
* @db.url@ (required)
* @db.user@ (required)
* @db.pass@ (required)
* @db.default.schema@ (optional, default="")
* @jpagen.package.name@ (default=models)
* @jpagen.template.entity@ (default=jpagen/entity.tmpl)
* @jpagen.template.idClass@ (default=jpagen/idClass.tmpl)
* @jpagen.template.list@ (default=jpagen/list.tmpl)
* @jpagen.mode@ (required, possible values=MYSQL,ORACLE)
* @jpagen.excludes@ (optional, regular expression)
* @jpagen.includes@ (optional, regular expression)

p. Be sure to configure correctly your database access using your **conf/application.conf** file (@db.user@, @db.pass@, @db.driver@, @db.url@, etc...).

h6. Made by "@flexitpro":http://twitter.com/flexitpro (Visit "flexitpro.com":http://www.flexitpro.com)
